---
layout: default
title: about me
---

Curriculum Vitae
----------------

You can read my CV [here](/curriculum-vitae.html).

About me in general
-------------------

I am from the UK but have also lived abroad - I spent 2011-2012 living
and working in the beautiful city of Strasbourg, France.

I like open source and [contribute](http://drupal.org/user/427352) to
[Drupal](http://www.drupal.org).

I love solving complex problems by pursuing [simple, but not
necessarily
easy](http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy), solutions.

Besides programming, I am also interested in international development
and economics. This has taken me from [Oxford](http://www.oxfam.org/)
(as a web intern), to as far away as [South
America](http://www.latinlink.org/).

In my free time I read books, play football, play video-games, and
spend time with my friends.

And most importantly I attempt to live out my faith in Jesus Christ.

Skills
------

If programming languages were spoken then you might say I:

- am fluent in **PHP**, SQL (specifically, having used MySQL, SQLite),
  HTML and CSS
- can get by in **Javascript**
- know a bit of **Scala**, **Clojure**, and **Ruby**
- know a bit of noSQL databases, particularly **MongoDB**

I have particularly experience with several PHP frameworks and CMSs -
most notably [Symfony2](http://symfony.com/) (and the
[Silex](http://silex.sensiolabs.org/) microframework) and
[Drupal](http://www.drupal.org).

But, fundamentally, I consider myself a programmer; my aim is to use
the right language and tools for the job, and I enjoy learning new
technologies and ways of thinking in order to do this.

I use [git](http://github.com/nicl) everyday and also have experience
working with SVN.

I am a **native-English speaker**, but also speak **French** to a
reasonable level.

I studied Philosophy, Politics and Economics at
[university](http://www.ox.ac.uk), but decided to program for a living
after making websites for friends and various events as a hobby both
during and after university. I also have a masters from LSE in
Development Studies (International Development - both the political
side, and the economics).