---
layout: post
category: blog
title: Jekyll and blog redesign
---

Applying for IGN's Code Foo had the added benefit of providing a redesign for my blog (one of the tasks was to design a liquid layout). As well as making a simple, but elegant, responsive design, I wanted to experiment with a new blogging platform. As much as I love Drupal it is, to be honest, a bit overkill for a simple blog. And the additional functionality does not justify the difficulty theming, configuring and updating the damn thing. What's more, writing and editing in a WYSIWYG is and has always been a horrible experience.

Enter [Jekyll](http://github.com/mojombo/jekyll).

Jekyll is, to quote from the github repository:

*...a blog-aware, static site generator in Ruby...*

It's made by Tom Preston-Warner - one of the brains behind github - and implemented in Ruby.

Jekyll is great because it is low-maintenance and supports an elegant workflow of writing locally -> git -> server. This means I can use whatever text tool I like (Emacs in this instance) to write my blog posts. And because Jekyll spits out static html files security is not an issue (no more updating) and performance is better than a dynamic equivalent, whether that be php, ruby, python, javascript, or some other language.

How does it work?
-----------------

Jekyll works by taking your content and converting it into a set of static html, css, and javascript files, together which form a website. What transforms Jekyll from a simple copy-write process are three dynamic elements:

1. YAML front-matter:
2. Liquid templating engine
3. Markdown/Textile support

If these are unfamiliar to you (as they were to me), a brief overview of each is provided below.

### YAML front-matter

*- literally, information (matter) at the top (front) of a file, written in YAML (a simple data serialisation format, like JSON).*

Used to provide post meta-data such as: categories/tags; which layout to apply; permalinks; and whether the post is published or not. YAML front-matter can also set up variables to use in the post/liquid templates, such as a page title.

YAML front-matter must be placed at the top (front) of a file and takes the form of a set of key-value pairs boxed by triple-dashes. The front-matter for blog posts on this site looks like the following:

{% highlight yaml %}
---
title: my title
layout: post
---
{% endhighlight %}

### Liquid templating engine

*- a templating engine, like SMARTY or TWIG in PHP, which provides a simple yet  secure and expressive (enough) way to output your data. In short, templating  languages provide easy printing, and simple logic (if/else and some form of  looping statement as a minimum). This makes them simpler to use, and safer as well.  By default, Jekyll  makes the following variables available for each  post: https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/wiki/template-data.*

Liquid provides a variety of operators, such as the standard if/else, variable assignment, a for loop, and more. You can also extend Liquid to add you own logical tags.

The temptation with templating languages is to keep making them bigger and bigger (this is, after all, how PHP started). I hope Liquid stays small, simple, and safe.

To find out about how to use Liquid see you can read their docs [here](https://github.com/shopify/liquid/wiki/liquid-for-designers).

### Markdown and Textile support

*-in-built support for two well-known text-to-html converters.*

HTML and XHTML have a horrible syntax and are a pain to write. WYSIWYG editors are nearly all useless in my opinion. So in-built support for the two best-known text-to-html converters is a welcome feature. Both formats have a minimal syntax which is easy to learn, and are easily readable. My personal preference is Markdown at the moment, but either is great!