---
layout: post
category: blog
title: San Francisco part 3
---

On my first full day in San Francisco, almost exactly seven weeks ago,
Mitch and I walked to Union Square to have breakfast. Today, as I
wandered around SF one last time, I found myself almost without
intention back in the same place. But a lot has changed. Code Foo has
come and gone; six and a bit weeks of new people, new places, and new
technologies.

The last few weeks have been pretty busy: everyone working hard at
their respective projects; a hackday; interviews for some; and lots of
socialising and, eventually, goodbyes. Of the nine off us living in
Startup House, I'm now the only one left. We had a great send-off
Wednesday night mostly spent in Bar Basic - our regular haunt - then
finishing with 'breakfast' at Denny's at around two o'clock Thursday
morning.

At the weekends I've managed to visit Yosemite and Sequioa national
parks (both stunning); thanks to Andie and Eric/Francisco for the
company and driving skills. I've also been to Japan-town, the IPL
Face-Off event, and lots of different eateries across town.

Overall thoughts
----------------

### The people

The best thing about the whole Code Foo 2012 experience was the people
- the IGN employees but, even more so, the other Code Fooers. People
were smart, friendly, wildly different, and interesting in their own
ways. They were both less and more geeky than I expected. None fell
into the stereotypical image of Americans held in Europe.

I was never bored and never lacking in good and generous company.

### The place

San Francisco is a great city. The food is good, the physical
environment is nice, and I met some great people. The weather could be
better, but you only have to drive a couple of hours south or inland
to find glorious sunshine. Yosemite and Sequoia national parks are
closeby and offer some of the most stunning national scenary and
wildlife to be found.

There are a few downsides to San Francisco that, while hardly unique
to SF, are worth mentioning. The first is that San Francisco is
(clearly) a city; while it didn't feel as busy as London, it is still
a concrete jungle full of cars, and lights. If you are not a
'city-person' than San Francisco is not for you. Secondly, there are a
lot of poor people and people with mental-health problems and it feels
like more should be done to care for them. Several homeless people
used to sleep on the benches outside and around Startup House, and
even right by the door itself. Many live a monadic lifestyle, with
large shopping-trolleys laden with stuff that they kart round. On way
to play basketball some weeks ago we discovered a tent city below a
freeway; a good two hundred people at least, certainly enough that the
situation must be semi-institutionalised by this point. Any big city
is going to have a lot of homeless people and more can always be done
to provide accommodation and help, but the problems of poverty and
homelessness seemed particularly big in San Francisco given the
relative and obvious wealth of the city as a whole. Lastly, more of a
personal point, San Francisco is *far* away from London, my family and
friends.

### What I learnt

My goals from Code Foo learning-wise were to see how a good
technical-business runs itself, and to become a better developer. I
felt like I succeeded at both!

IGN as a business does a number of things right: strong effort is made
to adopt new technologies (Scala for example), teams are small and
(mostly) dynamic and agile, and, most importantly, engineers have a
key-role in decision-making. Because of this, the work is varied,
exciting, and rewarding. It helps that IGN places a lot of emphasis on
'cultural fit'* when hiring. All of this stuff seems pretty obvious
and sensible, but lots of companies really struggle to implement these
ideas, or don't buy into them in the first place.

In respect to my personal learning, I gained exposure to and
experience with a plethora of new languages and technologies, in
particular the Scala language and how to design APIs (I was working
for the back-end team helping to build a social API). IGN made a great
effort to make Code Foo a great learning experience and succeeded. For
this reason alone, I would definitely recommend Code Foo to anyone
with a limited background in CS and development-experience who has a
passion for learning. You will almost certainly emerge a better
developer than when you went in.

Going forward
-------------

For now it is back to London, although I will definitely keep in touch
with IGN. Tech-wise, I've gained some solid experience working in
Scala and would love to pursue this going forward, whether that be
professionally (although Scala is still somewhat of a niche language
and jobs remain limited) or for my own side-projects. And if I do
start my own company in the future, I am sure it will have elements
from the IGN way of doing things mixed in!

\* My interpretation of this term is basically: are you excited about
what IGN does (and games in general), do you share their ideas about
how a business should be run (particularly re the
engineering-practices I mentioned above), and do you agree with where
the company is going/the long-term aim?

\** Nic's SF food reviews cont'd...

* Brick House (9/10 - great burger joint off 4th and Brannan,
inexpensive but very good. We went back again and again, and again...)
*Ike's Place (7/10 - well-known sandwich place, pros are the great
menu, -ves are the price)
