---
layout: post
category: blog
title: San Francisco, part 2
permalink: /2012/07/21/san-francisco-part-2.html
---

It's Saturday 21 July, and I've been in San Francisco almost two weeks. Code Foo
itself has lasted a week-and-a-half.

Our first few days were setup, HR stuff, and meet and greets. There are 17 of us
Code Fooers, all from incredibly different backgrounds and with varying levels
of experience. Ages range from 19 to 31 but most, like me, are in the mid-20s.
We've got people from Australia, the UK and, of course, all over the US itself.

IGN - the place
---------------

IGN's main offices are located on 2nd Streen, corner of Brannan. The outer
fascia is pretty basic, but once you get inside it's incredible - by far an away
the most interesting and beautiful offices I've ever worked in. Gaming
memorabilia everywhere, arcades and other things to play, places to watch
films/tv, giant Dovakin/Solid Snake/Alien/etc. statues everywhere, custom
artwork, you name it. All the meeting rooms are themed for a different game;
we've spent most of our time in Raccoon City (from Resident Evil). The focus is
on making things fun and encouraging people to be passionate about what they do.

IGN is moderately-sized in terms of people (~200 people in the SF office), and
very very big in terms of popularity (~70m unique visitors a month I think). But
it doesn't feel too big; I feel like they've done a good job of keeping 'small'
in mindset. Within the engineering team themselves, they work agile, and commit
early (6 commits to production were made in our first day and this is pretty
normal from what I understand). They like to release MVPs (minimum viable
products) and then iterate.

If you want to have a look at their offices, check out [this
video](http://techcrunch.com/2011/03/02/tc-cribs-ign-hq-gets-its-game-on-with-lawn-gnomes-plumbers-and-creepy-dinosaurs).

IGN - the people
----------------

One of the first meetings we had on our first day was with Roy Bahat - President
of IGN. But by the end of the week we had had introductions to pretty much every
team in the building (~200 people), although a good number were away at Comic
Con. The thing that struck me was that the hierarchy seems pretty flat; everyone
is encouraged to pursue their own ideas and challenge the status quo - in fact,
one of their core values concerns precisely this, 'irreverance'. Another thing
difficult to miss is that most people like games a lot and like IGN a lot,
whether they work for editorial (who review the games, write the articles, etc.)
or elsewhere. This isn't by chance; IGN are incredibly protective of their
culture, and only hire people who fit into this. Potential employees are
interviewed by a member of a completely different team, and if the interviewer
thinks they are not a good fit then, however well-qualified, they won't get
hired.

Lastly, they treat their staff well. All of us Code Fooers have received a new
macbook pro (not to keep alas) and, in general, the work environment is great.
The engineering team recently completed some big projects and to celebrate we
spent all of Friday at the Great America theme park(!). It was great that all of
us Code Fooers got to go, even though we're not full employees.

IGN - the work
--------------

The last week we've had talks and workshops pretty much all day every day. We've
covered html/css basics, jquery, javascript debugging, git, linux, Java and the
JVM, PHP, Ruby and Ruby on Rails, Scala, and more. Basically, an intro to their
entire tech-stack.

I'm by no means an expert in these technologies(!) but I now know where to start
and something of how IGN uses them in their engineering team. We've all learnt a
lot, and this internship is definitely proving a great way to learn. And, of
course, going forward we have full access to a team of 30 engineers who are
experts in their respective fields.

Q. Do they play games *all* the time?! - No, but they do in general like games a
lot and you're likely to hear a lot of talk about the latest big game release -
such as Diablo III - at the canteen etc. There is a team of young people who are
paid to capture game play footage; they *do* spend their entire time playing
games.

San Francisco and Socialising(!)
--------------------------------

There are ten of us Code Fooers living in 'Startup House' (which is a bit like a
hostel, but with better startup connections, and worse everything else). Most
evenings we grabbed food but didn't do too much. But last Saturday we most of
the day exploring, first heading over to Fisherman's Wharf, then hiring bikes
and cycling to and then across the Golden Gate Bridge. Fisherman's Wharf is part
pictaresque, part tacky. But we had some great food.\*

The Golden Gate Bridge itself is stunning.

This week we've explored some good lunch places, went to Great America, and went
out last night to a bar called Bar Basic. Friday day was spent at the 'Great
America' theme park.

\* Nic's Fisherman's Wharf food reviews

* In-n-Out (9/10 - famous fast-food chain. Despite my dietary requirements I
still managed to enjoy a great burger and chips here for not too much money)
* Boudin's (7/10 - well-known purveyor of Sourdough and bread-stuff in general.
Obviously not ideal for me, but I still found a great, and filling, salad. Plus
they had the Tour de France on TV!)