Where did all the comments go?
==============================

I've just been reading [this article][cia-spying] in the New York.
Times, and it's apparent they don't care about comments. Not really
anyway. Comments don't appear on the article unless you explicitly
expand them, and even then, only a couple are visible on my laptop
without scrolling.

The Guardian is the same. It feels like comments are an afterthought.
An addendum to the real meat - the privileged article.

Contrast with, say, [IGN][ign] which despite investing far less in
comments (they use Disqus rather than rolling their own) clearly
values them more. Every article has comments, displayed in full, with
real time updates and more. And they get an incredible number of
comments.

Why are newspapers so poor at commenting? I think a few reasons.
Firstly, they clung to the idea of owning their users. This led to
propriety systems which were no better or worse in fact than market
solutions (Disqus).

The main reason, however, is that they don't believe in user generated
content. Editorial is not sympathetic to the idea, and product is too
risk-averse to champion it.

The case for UGC remains strong though, the arguments are I believe
solid. Without UGC the papers are competing with the wealth of the
web, and as aggregators get more proficient they will struggle to keep
up and, ultimately, fall into irrelevance. The web scales, but
fixed-size, in-house, newsrooms don't.

We already see signs of this; papers are increasingly looking to
buzzfeed-style content because it is relatively cheap to produce and
has good returns. They are forced into this strategy because their
supply is fundamentally fixed so they must produce the cheapest but
also most cost-effective news. Of course, there is a massive tension
here with their core purpose - to inform.

Instead, we should be looking towards a Youtube of news. Youtube
succeeded in a tv-based world, not through higher quality, at least
not in the beginning, but through breadth. TV channels, like
newspapers, have supply constraints. For TV this means the 24 hour
cycle, but more the cost of producing shows (reality tv is popular
precisely because it is so cheap to make). For papers it was the size
of the paper (never a hard constraint), and now is the number of
journalists. Youtube didn't have the same constraints because it
leveraged the web to get users to provide content. As a result, it
could meet a vast range of interests and needs - far more than a
television channel or even network can provide. My local church or
community centre are not on TV, but they are on Youtube. My board game
interest group is not on TV but is on Youtube. Most of our interests
are niche but Youtube doesn't care - in fact it loves that fact.
Fundamentally, Youtube embraced a content model that scaled, with
great results.

We need the same for news. Aggregators and platforms are the future.
In house news will survive, but as a niche product only. Without
fundamental change, the Guardian, NYT and others will find that their
digital success is short-lived.

Note - the alternative is the HBO model. But then we have to genuinely
offer a step-change in quality.

[cia-spying]: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/01/opinion/The-CIAs-Reckless-Breach-of-Trust.html?_r=0
[ign]: http://ign.com
