I've always found logging in Java/Scala to be overly complicated for
what seems to be simply pushing text to files.

There are plenty of options, and standardising is difficult because
dependencies often make their own choice. SLF4J is supposed to solve
this by providing one-interface-to-rule-them-all, but it only partly
helps.

There remain several problems:

* too many implementations/choices
* too broad an interface
* lack of standardisation over formats

It turns out that logging is pretty complicated after all.

Some of this complexity is warranted - logging is [a key source of
poor application performance](https://vimeo.com/177215741) and so care
must be taken to avoid blocking. At the Guardian we experienced this
recently. Several apps were performing badly and returning errors and
autoscaling wasn't helping, if anything it was making things
worse. After a day or two thinking and also, crucially, looking at
some thread dumps, it became clear the applications were blocking in
the main threads on logging - they were Play apps so this is a big no
no. It turned out each app was writing to the same Kinesis stream and
shards and when the shards hit capacity the client library would
block. The failure here was pathalogical; a single app could, just by
logging, bring down multiple services!  Needless to say, swimlaning is
more subtle than people realise. But even accounting for performance,
the libraries still seem unjustifiably complex.

Let's step back a moment. What does good logging  look like? I would
say:

* it should be built into the language (at least the interface), to
  avoid bikeshedding and dependency hell
* asynchronous (because performance - yes you might lose records but
  for web apps at least availability is typically more important)
* a [simple
  interface](https://dave.cheney.net/2015/11/05/lets-talk-about-logging)
  (info and debug only, with only the latter toggleable)
* sent to standard out/err only (don't make assumptions about your
  environment)
* with an agreed, machine-friendly, format that is not fragile to
  changes (i.e. not a text-based format that is order-dependent)

The simple interface part was particularly interesting to me when I
first read Dave Cheney's article. To summarise it here, the argument
is that need just two logging levels, info and debug, and only the
latter should be optional (via a flag of some kind).

And note, some of these are clearly in tension; for example, your
volume and performance requirements may dictate your format.

In reality, we're stuck with what we've got, but we can do some things
to help:

1. refuse to use most log levels
2. pick a good format and stick to it
3. don't make assumptions about the file system
4. don't block
