Google's AMP is an attempt to improve the performance of articles on the
web.

I don't want to go into the politics of it here - not that it isn't very
important, just that others have already written about it already and
much better than I could. Instead, I want to discuss the AMP client-side
model and what I think about it, particularly in comparison to React and
so-called isomorphic Javascript approaches.

## SSR and Isomorphic JS

Server-side rendering seems to be incredibly popular at the moment. The
idea is to use React (or equivalent) on the client-side but with a
faster first paint (and FMP) than would otherwise be possible. The way
this works is that initial markup is produced on the server, using
Node/Express.js for example, and then the client-side framework binds or
'hydrates' this on the client to introduce any dynamic behaviour.

SSR is both an architecture and a technology choice and there are
significant pros and cons associated with it.

In constrast, AMP doesn't allow custom Javascript _at all_ and promotes
a strict separation between server and client-side concerns.

AMP is explicitly designed for publishers and article/blog-style content
and it does seem well-suited to that space.

But we also see notable publishers choosing the SSR/React-all-in model.
For example, the NYT site is entirely React-driven in this way.

The two approaches are entirely, completely, at odds it seems, but
appear to be operating in the same space!

## Lessons from AMP

As a self-professed full-stack\* developer and, at the time
of writing, tech-lead for www.theguardian.com, I've been thinking about
which approach is best for my beloved Grauniad. And I've come to the
conclusion that the AMP approach is ultimately the better way for us.

By 'AMP approach' I mean loosely: a server-side that produces markup,
and dynamic behaviour introduced by markup-driven web-components on the
client-side. **I do not mean the exact AMP libraries and that specific
implementation.** If you are not familiar with how AMP works, it is
probably worth taking a brief look at some of their examples at this
point before reading on.

This conclusion is of course _specific to our context_:

- we are a publisher of mostly text-content
- we have a very large audience, the majority of whom are not
  signed-in/regulars
- we want our journalism to reach as many people as possible, whatever
  their device or connection speeds
- we have a relatively complex site - plenty of layout types, and other
  subtle differences and combinations of visual design
- our site and content is completely free but we offer premium
  experiences (mobile native apps, and an editions product)
- we have lots (say 50) developers of a wide-range of skills and
  backgrounds writing both server and client-side code on the site

So why do I like the AMP approach and what are my concerns with the
SSR/hydrate alternative?

### Decoupling

Architectural decoupling is _the most important thing_ when it comes to
agility over the medium-long term for larger software services.

Isomorphic Javascript is, unfortunately, a coupling disaster:

- it tightly couples server-side templating with client-side interaction
- it couples different page components together into a single library
  and runtime

If you are producing a SPA or highly-interactive website, then the
isormorphic approach may justify itself, but a publishing site is not
such a great fit. The short-term benefits of the isomorphic approach are
likely to be dominated in the medium-long term by the coupling
constraints and eventual forced re-write down the line.

In contrast, AMP is relatively decoupled:

- you can use any server-side approach, it just has to return HTML
- it uses web-components under the hood

Web components are a web standard and can be (re-)written in any
combination of client-side technologies.

The great thing here is that you can _mix and match technologies_ across
the entire stack. Want to try out using Python to generate markup for
one section of the site or page type? Easy! As long as the relevant
markup is the same, the client-side behaviour will stay the same. Want
to experiment with using a new library to build some of the
web-components? Again, it's easy to do this alongside your existing
technology choices.

We should be very cautious about foregoing these important forms of
decoupling in our architectural choices.

An important caveat is that AMP is not fully decoupled; a core runtime
is still required to manage performance-critical operations - network
requests and DOM operations.

Isomorphic Javascript approaches are aware of some of these problems and
some of the solutions include lazy or partial hydration, and easier ways
to 'eject' out of the framework to run custom/self-managed client-side
code. I'm very cautious about buying into such complexity and not
convinced they address the coupling concerns (they are more about
improving client-side performance).

### Software engineering

Russell Cox, of Go(lang) fame, has defined software engineering as

> what happens to programming when you add time and other programmers

It is a human problem, but nonetheless critical, to ensure good
performance of the site as new features are added over time. Experience
has taught me that convention is an ineffective solution to this
problem.

The key assumption of the AMP-approach here is that, _for a publishing
site, the vast majority of client-side behaviour can be encapsulated in
a small set of client-side components._

Provided these components are well-written and performance tested,
developers can add client-side behaviour without the risk of damaging
client-side performance.

A core web team can steward these components without having to review
every PR (which is in any case unrealistic).

Now, of course it is possible to introduce linting, or other tooling
approaches with SSR to achieve something similar. But I much prefer the
significant layer of friction the AMP approach introduces here to adding
new client-side behaviours.

Before you write me off as some kind of control freak, it's worth
remembering that performance is absolutely crucial to our core mission
so it is worth being radical to help achieve it. Fast performance is
hugely associated with improved engagement, it ensures people with poor
connections (more likely in poorer countries) can still access our
content without it costing a fortune and/or taking forever to load, and
it significantly impacts our SEO performance too.

### Write once

A smaller point, but relevant to our case, is that our client-side DOM
operations are typically write-once. For example, after page load we
augment the core content with what we call 'onward-components' - things
like 'most popular' lists or 'related content'. VDOM approaches are
simply irrelevant to this kind of use case and yet can add a lot to your
Javascript bundle size (at least in the case of React DOM). And, if the
majority of your page is static, as in our case, then hydration - at
least in the naive implementation - is a pointless expense.

### \*Native

One motivation for Isormorphic JS, and something the NYT cite in their
blog posts, is the desire to use a single codebase across
multiple-platforms. React Native is increasingly powerful and offers the
promise of one codebase but with native behaviour on web and app (and
potentially other platforms too).

I'm not familiar enough with React Native to comment on this in detail,
although the scope of this kind of solution seems ambitious; it seems
likely that any abstraction across platforms will be quite leaky.

But I'm not aiming to criticise the NYT here! Our product offerings are
quite different. The NYT site is a premium experience - they have a
(partial) paywall - so it may well make sense to aim for a similar app
and website experience. In contrast, the Guardian website and apps are
very different. Our website is entirely free, whereas the apps are
designed to be a premium experience. The audiences are very different;
one is largely unknown and irregular, and the other is known and loyal.
It is difficult to see this product strategy changing in the near to
medium term so standardising on a single technology for the two doesn't
make sense in our case.

## Can I still use Node?

Some of you are reading this and thinking: this is all really obvious!
Isomorphiic JS is meant for highly-interactive sites ('apps') but not for
news sites!

And basically, I think this is right, albeit the arguments are subtler
and the tradeoffs larger than people sometimes realise.

I do want to add though, that there is still very much an argument for
using Javascript-based technologies on the server-side. Even if you
don't adopt SSR, Node, JSX, and CSS-in-JS can be really great:

- JS is likely much more accessible to client-side developers and
  designers than some other server-side languages (we use Scala at the
  Guardian which is definitely not accessible to this audience)
- JSX is a sensible approach to generating HTML
- CSS-in-JS is a great way to encapsulate styling; the approach is
  language-agnostic but the most popular and mature implementations seem
  to be in JS-land (we use Emotion for example)

What's more, if you stick to non-isomorphic JS, the usual JS tooling
nightmare (webpack, babel setup to do hot-reloading and all the
\*-ifications) simplifies dramatically.

\* I use this term loosely. My background is as a server-side developer,
but for the last couple of years I've been working on both client-side
and server-side concerns and so now have delusions of client-side
mastery.
